Fundamentals of Respiratory Care Research
 
 
Objectives
• 1.1.1 Describe the purposes for a research article
• 1.2.1 Describe how a properly-written research article is
structured
• 1.3.1 Describe the types of research
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
2
 
Overview of Respiratory Care Research
• You may never conduct a study but you must be familiar with
the concepts of research
• You need to become an educated consumer of medical
research
• If you want to become a respiratory care scientist
§ Find a mentor, someone who has experience conducting
scientific studies and publishing the results.
§ A mentor can help you turn the ideas in this chapter into
practical realities.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
3
 
Importance of Research in Health Care
• Academic medicine has three basic missions:
1. Heal
2. Teach
3. Discover
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
4
 
Importance of Research in Health Care
• Stakeholders involvement: (R.A.C.E)
§ Researchers
ü Need to be able to generate new ideas that inform or benefit
the other stakeholders
§ Administrators
ü Need to evaluate the quality of services and the validity of
policies and procedures
§ Clinicians
ü Need the ability to assess the usefulness of new procedures,
equipment and treatments
§ Educators
ü Need the ability to find, summarize, and present evidence for
clinical activities
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
5
 
Importance of Research in Health Care
• The Common Skill all stakeholders must have:
§ The ability to read and critically evaluate published scientific
reports.
• Without research
§ Cannot have meaningful evaluations of current practices
§ Cannot plan research
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
6
 
How to Review the Literature
Bibliographic databases
§ Contain books, book chapters, reports, citations, abstracts,
and either the full text of the articles indexed or links to the
full text
§ Provides search filters, automatic e-mailing of search updates,
the ability to save records, and filters for search results using "My
NCBI” (National Center for Biotechnology Information)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
7
 
How to Review the Literature
Search engines
§ PubMed- Most Popular
ü A service of the U.S. National Library of Medicine
ü Includes over 18 million citations from MEDLINE and other life
science journals for biomedical articles
ü Dates back to1948
ü https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZAtP0x9eb0A
§ SearchMedica
ü Delivers only the most clinically reputable content intended
for practicing medical clinicians
ü https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V66tI7uv_gg
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
8
 
How to Review the Literature
Synthesized databases
• Pros:
§ The Cochrane Collaboration is the leading synthesized
database.
§ Pre-filtered records for particular topics
§ May provide the “best” evidence without extensive searches of
standard bibliographic databases
• Con:
§ Subscription based with relatively large fees!
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
9
 
How to Review the Literature
Portals
§ Web pages that act as a starting point for using the Web or web-
based services
ü Provides access or links to other sites
Examples:
üMD Consult
– Provides links to books, journals, Clinics in Medicine,
patient education resources, and images
üOvid
– Provides links to books, journals, evidence-based
medicine databases, and the Cumulative Index to
Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
10
 
How to Review the Literature
Electronic Journals and Books
• We are rapidly reaching the point where all medical journals are
available online
§ Some are available only online (due to cost restraints)
• Electronic versions of textbooks available on the Internet
• Subscription services include:
§ Oxford Reference Online
§ STAT!Ref (great source for nursing and drugs)
§ Safari Books Online (excellent source of technical reference books)
§ Respiratory Care Journal (AARC)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
11
 
How to Review the Literature
General Internet resources
§ Google.com
ü Most popular general search engine
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
12
 
How to Review the Literature
Suggestions for conducting literature searches
• Talk to a professional librarian!
• Use Bibliographic software
Examples
ü EndNote
ü RefWorks
ü Zotero
§ AKA, Reference Management software
ü A database of the sources you use (books, journal
articles, websites etc.) when researching your
assignments.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
13
 
Starting RT Research
• Beginning on device evaluation
§ Particularly a new device
• Usually very inexpensive
§ Vendors often donate or loan equipment and supplies
• Approval not require by the “Institutional Review Board” (IRB)
§ IRB is required for studies of human subjects
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
14
 
Factors Affecting Feasibility of Research (M.A.D.S.A.K.)
• Measurability
• Availability of research subjects
• Duration and timing of study
• Significance or potential benefits to results
• Availability of equipment and funds
• Knowledge and experience of investigators
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
15
 
Objective 1.2.1
• Describe how a properly-written research article is structured
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
16
 
Steps in Research
• Find your motivation
• Find a mentor
• Find a good textbook on respiratory care research
• Develop a study idea
• Write a study protocol
• Analyze the data
• Publish a scientific paper
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
17
 
Steps in Research
Develop a study idea
• Choose and define a research topic
§ Implies concern or doubt about some concept or observation
§ Usually based on the observer’s experience from clinical
practice
• Clarify your study purpose through literature review
• Develop a formal problem statement
• From the problem statement comes either:
§ A brief statement of the study purpose(s)
§ A hypothesis statement
üA hypothesis is a supposition or proposed explanation
for an observation
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
18
 
Steps in Research
Write a study protocol
• The process of writing it out will help you clarify the goals of
the study and methods of investigation
• Permission may need to be sought from a funding source,
institutional review board (IRB), department manager, or
student advisor before a study may begin
• The research plan or research protocol
§ Provides an operational guide for the entire research team
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
19
 
Steps in Research
How to analyze the data
Statistical analysis
• Be familiar with the basics:
• The mean and standard deviation of a set of numbers
• P-value (probability-value)
• T-test
o Used to compare two mean values
• Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
o Used to compare more than two mean values
• A chi-square or Fisher Exact test
o Used to compare proportions
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
20
 
Steps in Research
How to get a scientific paper published
• Once you complete a project, you need to communicate the
results
• Three basics ways to formally present your findings:
1. The abstract
2. The poster
3. The paper
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
21
 
Steps in Research
How to write the “abstract”
• A condensed version of a research paper
• Appears at the beginning of the publication
• Most journals restrict the length of the abstract
• Should include:
§ Introduction
§ Background
§ Study purpose
§ Methods
§ Results
§ Discussion
• Start with a longer abstract and then edit
§ The idea is to decrease word count while increasing clarity!
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
22
 
Steps in Research
How to make a “poster”
• Allows a bit more freedom in terms of space as
compared to an abstract
• Generally 4 feet tall by 6 feet long
• Graphics should be at least 300 dots per inch (dpi)
• Usually presented in a group of 10-15 in small rooms
§ Hung on stands and visitors walk around reading and
discussing them with the authors
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
23
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
24
 
Steps in Research
How to write a “research paper”
• Takes anywhere from 20 to 100 hours
• Has the same basic outline as an abstract or poster but
goes into much greater detail
• Has a references section
• No word limit for the Introduction
• Most journals have a maximum word count for the full text
of the paper
§ Usually in the range of 2000-3000 words
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
25
 
Basic Structure of a Research Article
• Abstract/summary (slide 22)
• Introduction
• Materials and Methods
• Results
• Discussion
• Conclusion
• References
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
26
 
Basic Structure of a Research Article
Introduction
• Provide a brief background explaining why the study was conducted and why it is of
interest
• Research problem or hypothesis should be included
Materials and Methods
• Explains to the reader exactly what was done to answer the research question
and/or test the hypotheses described in the Introduction
Results
• Presents the data gathered from the experiments,
• “bare facts” with little or no explanation of its significance
Discussion
• Show how the results answered the research question that was first described in the
Introduction
• Should interpret the results in the face of earlier studies’ conclusions
Conclusion
• Should be briefly explained
• Includes reasons for rejecting alternate interpretations
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
27
 
Peer Review Articles
• Usually reviewed by two or three “peer reviewers”
• Read and critique any and everything about your paper
§ What words you use
§ What measurements you made
§ What statistical procedures you used
• Make a recommendation to the journal editor
§ Three possible outcomes
ü Should not be considered for publication
ü Rejected with an opportunity to revise and resubmit
ü Should be accepted as is
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
28
 
Objective 1.3.1
• Describe the types of research
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
29
 
Types of Research
• Quantitative Research
§ Collects data for numerical analysis
§ Example:
ü “How many men got their physical this year at our hospital?”
• Qualitative Research
§ Increases our understanding of “why” people act a way they do
§ Example:
ü “Tell me why men aren’t getting their physicals this year”
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
30
 
Types of Research
• Descriptive Research
§ Observes and describes associations between exposures and
outcomes
§ Show patterns of disease occurrence
§ Records events
§ Helps to generate hypotheses
• Analytic Research
§ Analyzes associations
§ Investigates relationships
§ Tests hypotheses
§ Also known as “explanatory” research
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
31
 
Summary
• Everyone practicing respiratory care has the responsibility to
intelligently evaluate what they are doing in light of scientific
evidence
• Even after doing research, we may still be confused, but we
believe we are confused at a higher level about more important
things
• Find a mentor and begin to create basic study ideas and conduct
experiments
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
32