Neonatal and Pediatric Respiratory Care
 
 
Unit 1: Neonatal/Infant/Pediatric Assessment
• 1.1.1 - Identify basic facts and terms about neonatal/pediatric
respiratory care
• 1.1.2 - Identify RDS in the infant through maternal and infant
assessments
• 1.1.3 - Identify Neonatal/Pediatric Disease Processes
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 1.1.1
• Identify Basic facts about neonatal and pediatric respiratory care
• Without reference, Identify Basic facts about neonatal and pediatric
respiratory care with at least 70% accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Neonatal
• Neonatal – The term Neonatal comes from neo (“new”)
and natal (“pertaining to birth or orgin”)
• Neonatal includes both mature and premature infants
• Mature infants are born anywhere between 38-42 weeks
of gestation
• Gestation – means the period of time between conception
and birth during which the embryo or fetus is developing
in the uterus
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Premature Infants
• Premature infants are
born before 38 weeks
gestation - Considered
High Risk
• A disease or physical
abnormality present at
birth are called -
Congenital
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
• Neonatal respiratory care is difficult due to the
anatomical differences of the newborn
▪ heart shunting
▪ underdeveloped lungs in infants born prior to 38
weeks
▪ weight and size differences
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
• Other issues that occur in newborns are congenital
issues
• Congenital – a disease or physical abnormality that
is present at birth
▪ Ie Gastroschesis, omphalocele, patent ductus
arteriosus ect…
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatrics
• Pediatric respiratory care is much like adult respiratory
care, with established disease processes and
management of ventilator settings
• The primary difference is where the child or adolescent
is in their growth, which is constantly changing
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatrics
• Pediatrics can include patients anywhere from infant to
21 years of age.
• Some pediatric patients are followed by the pediatric
team past the age of 21 if they had an established
disease process during their pediatric period (i.e.
cancer)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Maternal Factors
• Maternal factors have a major effect on the
health of the child at birth.
• Assessment of the mother should be done
initially.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 1.1.1 Review
• Identify Basic facts about neonatal and pediatric respiratory care
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 1.1.2
• Identify RDS in the infant through maternal
and infant assessments.
• Without reference, Identify RDS in the infant
through maternal and infant assessments
with at least 70% accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Shunts can produce symptoms of RDS
• Infant congenital
shunts can cause
symptoms that will
produce
• Low blood oxygen
(from shunting) can
cause PPHN and
increased WOB
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Importance of Infant anatomical shunts:
• There are several differences in the heart
anatomy and fetal circulation
• Three important bypass pathways function in
the developing fetus to enhance the flow of
blood to developing organs:
▪ Ductus Venosus
▪ Ductus Arteriosus
▪ Foramen Ovale
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ductus Venosus
• This is a shunt that exists between the liver and the inferior
vena cava, taking 2/3’s of the oxygenated blood from the
liver and allowing it to make it back to the heart quickly to
the rest of the body
• This shunt closes rapidly after placental blood flow ceases
(clamping the umbilical cord after birth helps close this)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
Ductus Arteriosus
• The ductus arteriosus allows shunting of the blood away
from the non-functional lungs in utero
• It is located between the pulmonary artery and the Aorta
• Pulmonary vascular pressure is higher than that of the
systemic vascular pressure, allowing most of the blood to
shunt away from the lungs and go to the rest of the body
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
Ductus Arteriosus
• This is normal and necessary, as the lungs have no
ability to oxygenate or ventilate, and the infant needs
the oxygenated blood coming from the placenta to
meet its systemic oxygenation needs
• This shunt normally closes after birth, as changes is
PaO2 and PaCO2 in the pulmonary capillaries cause
them to dilate, decreasing PVR and causing
constriction of the ductus arteriosus
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ductus Arteriosus
• The hormone prostaglandin can be given to maintain
the patency of the ductus arteriosus after birth
• This can be useful in some disease processes
amongst preterm infants
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Prostaglandin
• Prostaglandin is a hormone that slowly dissipates
after the infant is born
• Prostaglandin levels normally keep the ductus
open
• As the smooth muscle of the blood vessels “sense”
the drop in prostaglandin and increase in PaO2,
vessel constriction is triggered
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Foramen Ovale
• This is a common shunt between the two atria, allows
blood to shunt from the right to the left atria, through
the interatrial septal wall
• This shunt also allows oxygenated blood coming from
mom (from the ductus venosus) to be shunted to the left
side of the heart to quickly reach the systemic side of the
infants body to meet it’s oxygenation needs
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Foramen Ovale
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Foramen Ovale
• This duct closes usually three weeks after birth, as post
utero circulation becomes normalized
• Left sided heart pressure (SVR) increases and helps close a
flap of tissue over the foramen ovale, allowing it to seal and
close
▪ Systemic Vascular resistance (SVR)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Shunts
• If these anatomical shunts remain open after the
infant is born, they can cause a mixing of oxygenated
and deoxygenated blood which will cause issues in
the infant
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Maternal Factors as a Risk Factor
• Understanding maternal factors that could indicate adverse status
of Neonatal Patient
▪ Medical
▪ Physical
▪ Social
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Maternal Conditions with possible
adverse outcomes.
• Previous pregnancy complications
• (Gestational) Diabetes Mellitus: Large Gestational Age
(LGA), Congenital Malformations, Respiratory Distress
Syndrome (RDS), Hypoglycemia
• Maternal Age:
• <17 years Low birth weight, prematurity
• >35 years: Prematurity, chromosomal defects (Down
Syndrome)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
• Pregnancy – Induced Hypertension: Prematurity, SGA
(small for gestational age), Preeclampsia
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
The Placenta
• During the ~ 40 Week of gestational development (in
utero), the placenta acts as the organ of respiration for
the fetus, extracts O2 and excretes CO2
• Fetal hemoglobin and Maternal hemoglobin exchange
CO2 and O2
• Placental attachment and placement can affect some
of the maternal factors for fetal development
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Placenta
Approx 55cm long
2 arteries 1 vein
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Maternal Conditions with possible
adverse outcomes continued…
• Placenta Previa: The placenta
attaches itself to the opening
of the uterus (Cervix) and
increases the risk of delivering
prematurity, may cause
bleeding, and small
gestational age (SGA)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Maternal Conditions with
possible adverse
outcomes continued…
• Abruptio Placentae: Where the
placenta detaches from the wall in
some way, or blood builds up
between the placenta and the
uterine wall. Fetal asphyxia,
bleeding
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Maternal Conditions with possible
adverse outcomes continued…
• Alcohol consumption: SGA, CNS dysfunctional, mental
retardation, facial dysmorphology
• Smoking: SGA, Prematurity, Mental Retardation,
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
• Drug Use: Placental Abruption, IUGR (Itrauterine Growth
Retardation), prematurity, CNS abnormalities, and
withdrawal disorders
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Fetal Assessment and Tests
• Fetal scoring systems
• Ultrasonography
• Amniocentesis
• Fetal Heart Rate
• Fetal Blood Gas
Analysis
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Amniocentesis
• Amniocentesis: Direct sampling and quantitative
assessment of amniotic fluid.
• Amniotic fluid can be used to detect meconium (fetal
bowel contents), blood and sloughed cells.
• Sloughed cells can be used to detect certain genetic
abnormalities in utero.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Testing for Surfactant deficiency
• L/S Ratio: involves the
measurement of two
phospholipids, lecithin and
sphingomyelin, synthesized by the
fetus in utero
• The ratio should increase with
gestational age, a ratio of 2:1 is
indicative of stable surfactant
production in the mature lung.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
L/S Ratio
• A common test that uses amniotic fluid
sampling to determine if the infant will have
stable surfactant production at birth
• Also known as Lecithin/Sphingomyelin test
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Phosphatidylglycerol
• Phosphatidylglycerol: This is another lipid found
in the amniotic fluid that is used to assess fetal
lung maturity. Greater than 1% is indicative of a
less than 1% chance to have respiratory distress.
• Found in pulmonary surfactant.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Fetal Heart Rate
• Fetal Heart Rate: Measurement of the fetal
heart rate and uterine contractions during
labor.
• Examinations of fetal heart rate changes
related to uterine contractions identifies a
fetus in distress.
• Fetal HR of 100-160 beats/min is normal.
• Tachycardia can be indicative of fetal
hypoxemia, prematurity or maternal fever
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Fetal Heart Rate
• Decelerations: temporary declines in
fetal heart rate.
• Mild (<15 beats/min)
• Moderate (>15 to 45 beats/min)
• Severe (>45 beats/min)
• Occurrence can be distinguished
depending upon where the decel occurs.
• There are early, late and variable
decelerations. Some of these
decelerations are dangerous, and could
indicate a constriction on the babies
umbilical cord lifeline.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Umbilical Cord
• The umbilical cord is the lifeline between mother and fetus
• The thick gelatinous material that surrounds the umbilical
arteries and umbilical vein of the umbilical cord is called
Wharton’s Jelly
• During fetal movement, the umbilical cord can pinch and
blood flow can be interrupted to the infant
▪ This is especially true after the amniotic fluid is displaced
during the birthing process
▪ This can cause decelerations and stress the infant
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Umbilical cord Prolapse/Nuchal Cord
• Prolapse of the umbilical cord is when the infant’s
umbilical cord passes through the cervix into the birth
canal ahead of the presenting child
▪ Compression of the cord can occur in the uterus and is
called an occult prolapse
• Nuchal cord is where the umbilical cord wraps itself around
the infants' neck
▪ a dangerous scenario where the cord can compress the
infants neck, or the cord can be compressed upon
delivery
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Prolapsed Cord
Nuchal Cord
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Normal Birth/Delivery
is done one of two
ways:
• Vaginal delivery
• Allows the baby to clear
secretions by being
“squeezed” through the
birthing canal
• C-Sections
• Cut through the
abdominal wall to
remove the baby
• Are becoming a much
more common delivery
method
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Post Birth Assessment/Initial Intervention
• All newborns should be assessed immediately
upon delivery.
• Post Birth Assessments are critical to the RT’s
knowledge for infant assessment
• Often, the team in the OR will consist of a Doctor,
Nurse and RT for immediate resuscitation of the
newborn
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
Vernix Caseosa 
 
Lung Development
• Between gestational weeks 17-26 airways are increasing in
length and diameter, but vascularization of an adequate
capillary system that surrounds the lungs doesn’t occur
until weeks 24-25
• The distance between the primitive alveoli and the
capillaries are close enough to allow adequate gas
exchange
• This means children at weeks ~23-26 are viable and can be
born and supported
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Stages of Lung Development
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Evaluation of the Newborn
• All newborns should be assessed immediately upon
delivery.
• Two categories of infants will most likely need
interventions (>90% will not)
▪ Infants with evidence of Meconium
▪ Premature infants
• Babies should be dried and warmed, placed into an
incubator, and immediately assessed.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS (Meconium
Aspiration Syndrome)
• Meconium is the medical term for
the infant’s first stools/Bowel
movement.
• Generally a very sticky green-black
substance that if inhaled can cause
significant respiratory problems.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Role as Respiratory Therapist in Infant
Resuscitation
• In high risk births, we
are often a part of the
team that takes care
of the infant right after
birth
• We will take certain
actions during
resuscitation efforts.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS/Premature
Infant actions
• The most important action here
for a Respiratory therapist is
effective ventilation.
• This is done with effective bag
mask ventilation (1232)
• If a premature infant has a heart
rate of less than 100 beats/min
or is apneic, apply bag mask
ventilation first, at a rate of 40-60
min should be started (with room
air).
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS/Premature Infant actions
• During emergency resuscitation of a premature
infant the lowest oxygen concentration possible
should be used during infant bag-valve mask
ventilation
▪ Infants greater than 35wks gestation should be at
21% FI02
▪ Less than 35 wks GSA should be at 30%
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Oxygen Therapy
• Infants should always get the
lowest oxygen concentration
to provide adequate tissue
oxygenation
• However the ranges for
oxygen therapy will vary
greatly upon the patient’s
gestational age as well as
their disease etiology
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Oxygen Therapy cont…
The recommendation for
Preterm infants
oxygenation status is to
maintain a O2 sat
greater than 88% or
paO2 values of 40-70
mmHg when on an
oxygen delivery device or
ventilator
* NOTE THIS STOPS WHEN THE INFANT REACHES TERM, AT
THIS POINT 80-100 mm Hg OF PaO2 IS NORMAL
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Oxygen Therapy cont…
• Effective PPV (Positive Pressure Ventilation) usually results
in rapid improvement of heart rate.
▪ Initial pressures for bag mask resuscitation may be 30
to 40 cm H2O particularly for premature deliveries.
• If the heart rate continues to drop below a 60/min PPV
should be applied first for 30 seconds.
▪ If there is NO recovery within the first 30 seconds,
chest compressions must be applied.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
APGAR
• An Apgar score is assigned at 1 minute and 5 minutes
of life. The Apgar score is an objective scoring system
used to evaluate a newborn rapidly.
• A score of 7 or higher is considered a normal APGAR
score, a score of 7 may need some intervention and a
score of less than six after 1 minute may require more
aggressive support.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
Ballard Maturational Assessment (BMA)
• BMA - Used to determine
gestational age by using
six physical and
neurological signs to
assign a week of
gestational age to the
newborn.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Weight
• All newborns weighing less than 2500 grams are
considered low birth weight (LBW)
• VLBW (Very low birth weight) <1500g
• ELBW (Extremely low birth weight) <1000 g
• Weights can be compared to the Ballard scoring
system to define the developmental status of the
child.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Colorado Intrauterine Growth chart
• The Colorado Intrauterine Growth chart is
based upon a large population of infants
that compare weights to gestational age
• This gives a growth curve, which is used to
estimate whether a baby is properly
developing, or a quick estimate of their
gestational age based upon their weight
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Colorado Intrauterine Growth Chart
• Infants who are in the
90th percentile are
generally considered to
be LGA “Large for
gestational age” while
infants who are in the
10th percentile and
below are considered
to be SGA “Small for
Gestational Age”
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Colorado Intrauterine Growth Chart
• Small preterm infants are at the highest risk:
▪ Lungs are not fully prepared for gas exchange
developing respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)
▪ Digestive tracts have difficulty absorbing fats
▪ Immune systems are not able to ward off infections
▪ Smaller infants have a very large surface area-to-body
weight ratio, which increase heat loss and impairs
thermoregulation.
▪ Vasculature is less developed, thus increased
likelihood for hemorrhaging, particularly in the
developing ventricles (hemispheres) of the brain.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Neo/Infant Respiratory Assessment
• Normal respiratory rate of an infant should be anywhere
between 40-60 breaths/min.
• The lower the gestational age, the greater the likelihood
for a higher respiratory rate. A rate of 60 > is considered
to be tachypnea.
• Breaths less than 40 bpm should be checked against the
child’s baseline to see whether or not this is normal.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Infant Heart Rate
• Normal infant heart rate is between 100 to 160
beats/min.
• Heart rate can be assessed by auscultation of the
apical pulse, normally located at the fifth
intercostal space, midclavicular line.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere  
— Always
 
Pulse Checks
• When checking an infant pulse, you should check
the pulse at the Femoral and BRACHIAL pulse site
▪ Weak pulses generally indicate hypotension, shock or
vasoconstriction
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
• Bounding peripheral pulses occur with
major left-to-right shunting through a
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
• A strong brachial pulse with a weak
femoral pulse may suggest PDA or
coarctation of the aorta
• Normal blood pressures based on weight
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Silverman Scoring System
• The Silverman scoring system is an Identifier for
the severity of a lung disease after birth.
• Auscultation of the infant chest is much more
difficult due to size and sound transfer through
the patient’s lungs.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Silverman Scoring System
• Identification of breathing difficulties and the
severity of lung disease can be determined through
observation of other key physical signs:
✓Nasal Flaring
✓Cyanosis
✓Expiratory Grunting
✓Tachypnea
✓Retractions
✓Paradoxical breathing
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Silverman Scoring System
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome(RDS)
• RDS is expressed immediately after birth
• Tachypnea accompanied with worsening retractions,
paradoxical breathing, and audible grunting and nasal
flaring
• Increased fluid and atelectasis of the lungs,
auscultation may reveal decreased breath sounds or
fine crackles
• Cyanosis may or may not be noted
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
RDS (Respiratory Distress Syndrome)
• Generally a chest x-ray will be definitive in identifying
patients with RDS. Diffuse, hazy, reticulogranular
densities with the presence of air brochograms and
low lung volumes
• Most likely due to insufficient surfactant
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Reticulogranular (Ground Glass)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Reticulogranular cont…
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Air Bronchograms
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
RDS Continued…
• Major factors that cause RDS are surfactant
deficiency (below 34 weeks), decreased alveolar
surface area (lung collapse, decreased lung
compliance), increased small airways compliance,
and presence of ductus arteriosus
• To further compound the primary issue of low
surfactant, low oxygenation and ventilation lead to
increased pulmonary vascular resistance
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
RDS Continued…
• Increased pulmonary vascular resistance will lead to a
further right to left shunting that increases as
hypoxemia worsens. (PPHN)
• Both hypoxemia and the developing acidosis from
ineffective ventilation will lead to further surfactant
reduction and worsening of the patient’s lung
compliance
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Signs of RDS
• Nasal flaring is thought to allow a decrease in
airway resistance, and to reduce the collapse of
the airways during negative force of inhalation
• Grunting is a way to splint the patient’s airway by
forcing air against a partially closed glottis,
generally an indicator of alveolar collapse
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Signs of RDS
• Retractions can occur in the suprasternal,
substernal and intercostal regions.
▪ Retractions generally indicate an increased
work of breathing especially in patients with
decreased pulmonary compliance
• Paradoxical breathing is where the patient draw in
the chest wall to breathe in, and the abdomen stays
put.
▪ This leads to an odd see-saw pattern of
breathing and is typically indicative of
increased work of breathing.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Signs of RDS
• Cyanosis can sometimes be absent in the
presence of high fetal hemoglobin,
Hyperbilirubinemia and elevated fetal hemoglobin
levels. Even with PaO2 levels of 30 mmHg, the
infant may appear with a normal color.
• The severity of the lung disease, and certain
processes like grunting, flaring and retracting may
be an indicator for advanced modes of ventilation
such as CPAP to improve lung volumes and gas
exchange.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Treatment:
• CPAP and PEEP are both adequate means to help
improve patient’s outcomes with RDS
• Advanced ventilator modes of HFV may be required in
situations of rapid deterioration of the patient
• Optimization of PEEP/CPAP will not only help improve
oxygenation, but improve FRC and ventilation as well
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Surfactant Deficiency and RDS
• Surfactant is produced at 24 weeks of gestation
• Prior to 34-35 weeks the amount of surfactant is adequate,
but trapped inside the alveolar type II cells
▪ This will not allow the surfactant to be released to the
alveolar cells, and lower the surface tension of the alveoli
▪ Think LaPlaces law
✓ (High surface tension, decreased compliance.)
• This leads to a snowball effect in patients, and may develop
further into RDS in some patients
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Surfactant Deficiency cont…
• First, surfactant deficiency in the
lungs leads to a decreased lung
compliance and a high surface
tension
▪ This causes alveoli to collapse
and lead to atelectasis and
increased work of breathing
• Second, the increased surface
tension inside the lungs pulls
fluid from the pulmonary
capillaries, further decreasing our
complianceImproving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
Surfactant Therapy
• There are three different kinds of surfactant preparation in the
United States for management of RDS
▪ Beractant (Survanta), Calfactant (Infasurf), Poractant (Curosurf)
• Surfactant is generally derived from Bovine or Porcine sources
such as Curosurf or Infasurf.
• Some centers use prophylactant surfactant replacement therapy
for infants under 1500g.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Surfactant Therapy Continued
• All surfactants are delivered via the ETT
▪ Allows for rapid distribution of the drug throughout the
lungs
• Infants will be positioned usually on their sides or
according to the guidelines set by the surfactant
manufacturer
• However if the infant cannot be repositioned, they may
still receive the surfactant in the supine position
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Common Chart (Do not Memorize)
Beractant
(Survanta)
Calfactant
(Infasurf)
Poractant alfa
(Curosurf)
Dose mg/kg of
phospholipid 100 100 100-200
ml/kg 4 3 1.25-2.5
Administration
dose quickly in
each of four
positions
dose slowly
supine then
rotated
Whole or dose
supine
Dosing interval Every 6 hr or
more often
Every 12 hr or
more often
Every 12 hr or
more often
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Normal ABG Assessment
*NOT TESTABLE
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Blood Gas and Saturations
• Capillary blood gas sampling and pulse oximetry
analysis will be utilized to assess the newborn for
both congenital heart defects and respiratory
disorders.
• Pulse Oximetry should be kept above 88% in pre-
term infants and above 95% in term infants and
pediatrics
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Blood Gas and Saturations
• If these numbers drop below this %,
identification of the primary issue and delivery
of oxygen to prevent hypoxemia will be
necessary.
• Blood gases should be kept above 40 mmHg
and less than 70 mmHg for premature infants
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Blood Gas and Saturations
• Patent Ductous Arteriosus and Patent Formen Ovale
can cause right to left shunting:
▪ Can cause a decreased O2 saturation due to mixing
▪ Can be determined by placing a probe on the right arm and
leg
▪ Greater than 5% saturation difference can be indicative of a
right to left shunt, most probable due to the patient having a
patent ductous arteriousus and patent Formen Ovale
✓ This is measured by attaching a probe to the right hand which is
preductal (PICTURE) and a probe on the left lower leg for post
ductal (PICTURE)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pre-Post Ductal
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Capillary Stick
• Blood gas values from
capillary sticks from the heel
of the foot will be important in
the monitoring of PCO2 and
electrolytes
• Oxygen values from capillary
sticks are inaccurate since it is
a mixed venous sample
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Capillary Stick
• If an infant is having chronically high PCO2
with normal oxygenation values a capillary
stick is the best method of assessing the
infants PCO2 status
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatric Assessment
• Assessment of pediatric patients can be difficult
due to age differences and the rapid growth and
development that occurs during the younger years
in life.
• Initial assessment of the pediatric patient begins
with adequate perfusion and heart rate, should
start with the patency of the patient’s airway.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatric Assessment continued…
• Heart rate and RR should be assessed according
to age appropriate chart.
• Generally 20-40 BPM is acceptable for a
respiratory rate for pediatric patients
• A heart rate of 60-100 is acceptable
▪ It is possible for younger infants and toddlers to
have higher than expected heart rates
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatric Assessment Continued…
• Asthma, allergic reactions and infections are common in
the pediatric patient
• Effective use of medications in the treatment of
respiratory distress is essential
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatric Assessment Continued…
• Pediatric patients with noted accessory muscle use,
grunting, flaring and retraction are all signs of
respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)
▪ Head bobbing, chin up and abdomen expansion are
signs of impending respiratory failure
• Usually referred to broadly as RDS
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatric Assessment Continued…
• Levels of alertness are particularly useful in the
pediatric patient in identifying whether or not
intervention will be necessary
• Fully awake, agitated, minimally responsive and
unresponsive are all indicators for whether or not a child
will need further treatment with an advanced airway
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatric Assessment Continued…
• Newborns with certain cardiac anomalies are
dependent on their intracardiac shunts to survive:
– Ductus Arteriosus
– Ductus Venosus
– Foramen Ovale
• An increased saturation in newborns promotes
constriction of the ductus arteriosus.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Oxygen Therapy cont…
• Although this constriction is normally a positive
response, it may cause premature closure of the
ductus arteriosus in infants with ductal-dependent
congenital heart defects.
• An infant born with hypoplastic left heart syndrome,
a defect in which the left-sided heart structures are
poorly developed, relies on the patency of the
ductus arteriosus for systemic blood supply.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 1.1.2 Review
• Identify RDS in the infant through maternal
and infant assessments.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 1.1.3
• Identify Neonatal Pediatric Disease Processes
• Without reference, Identify Neonatal Pediatric Disease
Processes with at least 70% accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome: Pathophysiology
• Effects some 60-70 thousand infants every year
• Respiratory distress syndrome is also known as
hyaline membrane disease, which is a lung
disease of prematurity
• The incidence of this disease process only
increases as gestational age decreases (Inverse
ratio)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome: Pathophysiology
• Major factors that cause RDS are surfactant
deficiency (below 34 weeks), decreased alveolar
surface area (lung collapse, decreased lung
compliance), increased small airways compliance,
and presence of ductus arteriosus
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
*Respiratory Distress Syndrome:
Pathophysiology
• To further compound the primary issue of low
surfactant, low oxygenation and ventilation lead to
increased pulmonary vascular resistance
• This will lead to a further right to left shunting that
increases as hypoxemia worsens
• Both hypoxemia and the developing acidosis from
ineffective ventilation will lead to further surfactant
reduction and worsen the patient’s lung compliance
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
*RDS: Clinical Manifestations
• RDS is generally expressed immediately after birth
• Tachypnea accompanied with worsening retractions,
paradoxical breathing, and audible grunting are noted.
Nasal flaring may also be seen
• With increased fluid and atelectasis in the lungs,
auscultation may reveal decreased breath sounds or
fine crackles
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
*RDS: Clinical Manifestations
• Cyanosis may or may not me noted
• Chest x-ray will be definitive in identifying patients with RDS
• Diffuse, hazy, reticulogranular densities with the presence of air
bronchograms and low lung volumes are typical
• Air Bronchograms appear as aerated, dark, major bronchi
surrounded by the collapsed or consolidated lung tissue
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
*RDS: Treatment
• CPAP and PEEP are both adequate means to help
improve patient’s outcomes with RDS
• Advanced ventilator modes of HFV may be required in
situations of rapid deterioration of the patient
• Optimization of PEEP/CPAP will not only help improve
oxygenation, but improve FRC and ventilation as well
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Transient Tachypnea of the Newborn (TTN)
Pathophysiology:
• Known as Transient
Tachypnea of the
Newborn or Type 2 RDS
• The most common
respiratory disorder of
newborn patients
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
TTN Pathophysiology
• This process is most likely caused by slow clearance
of lung fluid post-delivery
• During most births, 2/3’s of this fluid is expelled from
the lung by normal delivery and squeeze produced by
the birthing canal
• These mechanisms are impaired during delivery by
caesarian section
• Fluid inside the lungs leads to decreased lung
compliance, and increased airway resistance.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
TTN Clinical Manifestation
• Tachypnea, and
chest x-rays noted
to have diffuse
haziness and
perihilar streaking
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Treatment of TTN
• Generally patients will benefit from increased FiO2 delivery
through an Oxyhood or Nasal cannula
• CPAP or HFNC is extremely beneficial, as increased
intrapulmonary pressure will help displace extra fluid inside of the
lungs to the lymph or capillaries surrounding the alveoli
• TTN resolves mostly within 24-48 hours post birth
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Apnea of Prematurity: Pathophysiology
• Common controllable disorder among premature infants
• Infants can have periods of apnea from 5 to 10 seconds
with a period of rapid respirations to compensate for the
period of no breathing
• Where complications occur is if the period of apnea lasts
beyond 15 seconds, or cyanosis, hypotonia, pallor or
bradycardia occur
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Clinical Manifestation of AOP
• Generally premature infants lack the mature control of ventilation
controlled by your CNS and Peripheral chemoreceptors
• Instead of increasing both VT and RR to compensate for increases
in CO2 during periods of apnea, only VT increases and there may
be a small rise in CO2
• Coupled with multiple periods of apnea this can cause acidosis and
furthering complications of the respiratory driveImproving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Treatment of AOP
• Theophylline, Caffeine, CPAP
• Stimulation in cases that aren’t quite as severe
• Generally this disease process is self-limiting,
and gestational ages of 37-44 weeks are the end
point of these episodes
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
PPHN (Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension)
• Also known as Persistent Fetal Circulation. Although
the exact reason why this occurs isn’t well known,
there are probably a multitude of issues that lead to
PPHN.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
PPHN (Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension)
• Hypoxemia, metabolic and respiratory acidosis and
over developed pulmonary vasculature can lead to
constricted pulmonary blood flow resulting in PPHN
• As the pulmonary capillaries constrict, the blood flow
is shunted away from the lungs back to the heart,
increasing the Pulmonary Vascular Resistance (PVR)
above the Systemic Vascular Resistance (SVR)
▪ This means that blood continues to shunt through the
foramen ovale, and the ductus arteriousus even after
birth
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
PPHN Clinical Manifestation
• PPHN is generally noted when the
patients SAT or PaO2 change rapidly
regardless of incremental changes in
FiO2
• A ≥5% change noted in the patients
pre and post ductal saturation are
considered to be indicative of a patent
ductus arteriosus which may indicate
PPHN
• This is done by placing a saturation
probe on the right arm and one on left
leg
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pre and Post Ductul Study
Pre Ductal (NO
MIXING)
Post Ductal
(MIXING)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
PPHN Treatment
• Removal of the underlying cause
▪ Correction of acidosis, FiO2, surfactant ect…
• If the patient does not improve, intubation and
mechanical ventilation/HFV are recommended
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia (BPD)
• BPD is a progressive disease
• BPD is a combination of several
factors that lead to the destruction
and dysfunction of the lungs
• Immaturity, genetics, malnutrition,
O2 toxicity and mechanical
ventilation all have been shown to
cause BPD
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia (BPD)
• From a respiratory therapist standpoint, the most
important factors to us are:
▪ Atelectrauma (lung collapse)
▪ Volutrauma (large tidal volumes) that lead to
damage of the lung tissue
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia (BPD)
• Other factors such as Hyperoxia, which produces super
oxidants that destroy biological tissues in the newborn
• Preterm infants do not have a well-developed immune
system that helps defend against the super oxidants
• Super oxidants have the same effect as volutrauma, with
increased inflammation and injury to the a/c membrane
and bronchial tree.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
BPD Continued…
• The longer the patient is on the
ventilator, and the increasing need for
both larger tidal volumes and higher FiO2
to maintain proper oxygenation and
ventilation, the patient will begin to
develop progressive pulmonary damage
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
BPD Clinical Manifestation
• Many patients may start off with little to
no support, until an underlying process
causes them to become intubated and
need higher levels of support.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
BPD Clinical Manifestation
• BPD is very similar to COPD in adult
patients, with increased atelectasis
and emphysema
• Fibrosis can occur due to the
buildup of hyaline membrane, will
cause increased airway resistance
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
BPD Treatment
• Measures like appropriate tidal volumes and
FiO2 are the best method to prevent BPD just
like an adult's ARDS case.
• Prevention is the primary method of
treatment in cases of BPD
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
BPD Treatment
• Establishing an optimal PEEP/FRC with lung
protective tidal volumes will prevent the
likelihood of developing severe BPD
• The delivery of surfactant and proper
supplementation of FiO2 to reach a desired
PaO2 is imperative to prevent the likelihood of
inflammation being developed due to decreased
lung compliance and super oxidants
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS (Meconium Aspiration Syndrome)
• MAS is a disease of term and near term infants,
involves the inhalation of fetal bowel movements.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS (Meconium Aspiration Syndrome)
• Amniotic fluid consists mainly of fetal lung fluid, fetal
urine, and transudate from the uterine wall.
• Meconium is occasionally passed by the fetus, which is
essentially just bile, cholesterol, and normal
gastrointestinal contents
• Normally the first page of meconium is not until the infant
is delivered, but occasionally it does occur under
situations in which the fetus is under distress
▪ Meconium aspiration can occur in utero
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS (Meconium Aspiration Syndrome)
• Infants generally will have meconium streaking, fetal
tachycardia prior to birth and gasping retractions
after delivery
• An APGAR score of 5 or less, low umbilical PH will
also immediately place the infant under observation
for MAS
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS (Meconium Aspiration Syndrome)
• MAS can cause severe air trapping and airway
obstruction due to it’s viscous nature
• If the MAS is present in the lungs in large quantities,
this can cause PPHN, hypoxemia with acidosis and
airway collapse.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
MAS Treatment
• Intubation with an ETT and direct suction of the ETT should
be applied immediately in severely depressed infants with
meconium streaking
• This is done until no meconium is noted, or 2-4 aspirations
have been performed
• Suction should be continuously regulated between -70 to -
100 mm Hg.
▪ A clean ETT (not used for suctioning) should be left in
place after suctioning, and mechanical ventilation or HFV
should be initiated
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
MAS Ball Valve Effect
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH)
• Congenital Diaphragmatic
Hernia is a rare defect
where the contents of the
abdominal cavity make
their way into the thoracic
cavity.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
CDH Clinical Manifestation:
• There are lesser and more severe
versions of this congenital disorder
• A Chest X-ray will reveal the intestines
(bowel), stomach and maybe liver
lodged in the thoracic cavity
• This will increase pulmonary
resistance, and cause severe damage
to the one lung that the infant is
subsiding on
• The heart may also be impacted and
reduce the patients’ blood pressure.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
CDH Treatment
• Remove the patient’s
bowel gas, slowly
suction the contents of
the abdominal cavity to
their normal positions
and close the breach
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
ROP (Retinopathy of Prematurity)
• The capillaries of the retina begin branching out
at 16 weeks.
• Capillaries begin from the optic nerve and grow
toward the ora serratta, the retinas anterior end.
• If these capillaries reach the inner portion of the
eye, the capillaries will necrose and die due to
constriction of the capillaries in the presence of
high FiO2 (causing high PaO2).
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
ROP (Retinopathy of
Prematurity)
• Those capillaries that don’t necrose will
continue to proliferate into the eye, and
eventually necrose, bleed and cause large
hematomas in the eye that will lead to
obstruction of vision, with possible detachment
of the retina.
• Maintain PaO2 less than 80 mm Hg in
premature infants to reduce the impact or
likelihood of ROP
• There are varying degrees of ROP
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
ROP Treatment
• The limitation of high oxygen concentrations in
combination with new laser eye surgery will reduce the
incidence and impact of ROP in infants. Typically ROP
develops in 25 to 35% of premature infants.
• Oxygenation levels should maintain an oxygenation in
the infant between >88% and <94% to prevent the
likelihood of developing ROP in the premature infant
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pulmonary Interstitial Emphysema
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Clinical Manifestation of PIE
• As air dissects and collects in the interstitial space,
small airways and capillaries are compressed
• This causes a V/Q mismatched followed by
deterioration of ABG’s
• Our response is to increase ventilator pressures and
PEEP in response
• This will worsen the patients response, and
perpetuate the collection of gas in the interstitium
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Clinical Manifestation of PIE
• Occurs due to effects of mechanical ventilation
such as chronic use of High PEEP, PIP, and
prolonged I-times. There are varying levels and
forms of PIE, dependent upon where the air
penetrates to
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
PIE Treatment
• Lower Airway pressures while maintaining
oxygenation and ventilation
• This can be done well with High Frequency Jet
ventilators (HFJV), as this ventilator helps prevent air
leaks while maintaining effect ventilation and
oxygenation
• Discontinue the mechanical ventilator (CMV) and
place the patient on the High Frequency Jet ventilator
(HFJV)
*Unfortunately PIE increases the likelihood of developing BPD.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Gastroschisis
• Gastroschisis – a congenital defect is a
birth defect of the abdominal wall.
▪ The intestines are found outside of the
babies body, exiting through a hole beside
the belly button (umbilicus)
▪ Causes multiple complications for
respiratory therapists.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NEC (Necrotizing Enterocolitis)
• Necrotizing enterocolitis is a common
infection of the intestine in neonates
• Patients born prior to their 38 weeks of
gestation (premature) have low blood
flow to their intestines and
underdeveloped intestinal tracts
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NEC
• This combination as well as the early introduction of
gut bacteria can cause an infection of the intestinal
wall leading to infection and death of the wall tissue
• This could cause sepsis of the patient and eventual
death
Contributing
factors for NEC
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Common Infant and Pediatric Diseases:
SIDS
• This is the leading cause of death for infants under
the age of 1, within the first 1-4 months of life
• Approximately 7000 infants die of SIDS each year
in the United States
• SIDS occurs when a previously otherwise healthy
infant dies unexpectedly, most often during sleep
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Common Infant and Pediatric Diseases: SIDS
• Autopsies show evidence of repeated episodes of
hypoxemia or ischemia
• Otherwise there are no known causes of SIDS
• Generally SIDS occurs during winter, in children
who have experience an apparent life-threatening
event (cyanotic, apneic, limp), or was placed in
the prone sleeping positions
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Common Infant and Pediatric Diseases: SIDS
• Prevention is key in SIDS
• Keeping the child in a supine or side laying
positions and removing all excess blankets and
toys from the bed greatly reduces the risk of
accidental suffocation of the child
• Unfortunately it is very difficult to distinguish
between intentional suffocation and SIDS
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
• GERD is the regurgitation of stomach contents.
• GERD can cause some reactive airway diseases,
Pneumonia, and other upper airway issues.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bronchiolitis
• An acute infection of the lower respiratory
tract, usually caused by respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV)
• Nearly 1 in 10 infants younger than 2 acquire
this infection.
• Less than 1% of infants that are hospitalized
with bronchiolitis die from respiratory failure.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bronchiolitis
• The primary issue is that infants who have BPD
or are immunologically suppressed infants.
• These infants are very similar to our patients
who start in the NICU.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bronchiolitis Clinical Manifestation
• Bronchiolitis causes inflammation and
obstruction of the small bronchi and
bronchioles
• Bronchiolitis commonly occurs soon after a
viral upper respiratory infection.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bronchiolitis Clinical Manifestation
• The patient may have a small cough, which may
soon turn into respiratory distress like dyspnea
and tachypnea.
• Progressive inflammation of the airways will
soon cause expiratory wheezes and increased
airway resistance
• Chest X-rays show signs of hyperinflation with
areas of consolidation.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Treatment
• Treatment is often in the form of prophylaxis,
where infants and children who have congenital
disorders, BPD or respiratory issues can be
passively immunized against RSVImproving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Croup
• Subglottic swelling and obstruction (Steeple Sign) can be seen
on an anterior posterior neck x-ray
• Also known as laryngotracheobronchitis
• Children begin to have stridor, and a barking seal cough as the
disease progresses
• Treatment is only given to the patient if there are signs of severe
RDS with cyanosis
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Croup
• Generally caused by the parainfluenza virus, this is the most
common airway obstruction in children 6 months to 6 years old
• Sometimes bacterial infections like staphylococcus aureaus,
group a streptococcus pyogenes, haemophilus influenza may
worsen croup
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Croup Clinical Manifestation:
• Croup starts as nasal congestions, fever and
cough
• Children begin to have stridor, and a barking seal
cough as the disease progresses
• Sometimes dyspnea, cyanosis and
exhaustion/agitation occur as well
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Croup Clinical Manifestation:
• The best way to rule out epiglottitis, and to
properly identify croup is through chest x-ray
• A A-P chest x-ray shows a narrowing of the
trachea at the level of the cricoid cartilage
• Making it very difficult to breath, and showing as
a “steeple” or “picket fence” sign
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Croup Treatment
• Given to the patient if there are signs of
severe RDS with cyanosis.
• Cool mist therapy may be appropriate for
mild to moderate cases
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Croup Treatment
• For severe cases corticosteroids and epinephrine
have been shown to have the greatest benefit for
decreasing the severity of this disease process
• The use of heliox may also be beneficial to overcome
the obstruction caused by the inflammation of the
airway
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Epiglottitis Pathophysiology
• An acute and often life-threatening infection of the upper
airway that causes severe obstruction of the upper airway.
• This is supraglottic swelling
▪ Labored breathing, fever, sore throat, difficulty swallowing
and stridor
• The most common cause of this is Haemophilus Influenza.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Epiglottitis Pathophysiology
• However there are several others such a
Streptococcus Pneumonia, S. aureus, Klebsiella
pneumonia, Haemophilus parainfluenzae and beta-
hemolytic streptococci
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Epiglottitis Clinical Manifestation
• Symptoms are much the same as Croup.
• With labored breathing, fever, sore throat and stridor.
• The difference between croup and stridor can be
difficult to distinguish at points.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Epiglottitis Clinical Manifestation
• A chest x-ray of the neck is one definitive way to tell the difference.
• On a lateral chest x-ray, there will be a thumbs up sign where the epiglottis is
shown to be swollen
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Epiglottitis Treatment
• The primary issue is the danger of further inflaming the upper airway, causing a
complete obstruction.
• Only staff that are familiar with emergency intubations should be in the care of
patients with epiglottitis
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Epiglottitis Treatment
• Children will be treated with antibiotic
therapies, corticosteroids and racemic
epinephrine may help to decrease the swelling
• To bypass the airway resistance, Heliox may be
used.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis Pathophysiology:
• One of the most common genetic diseases
amongst whites in the United States
• This is an inherited autosomal recessive trait
that affects approximately 30,000 people in the
United States
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis
The disease is caused by a genetic mutation of the gene coding
for a large protein called CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis Pathophysiology:
• Movement of chloride ions is vital in the production
of secretions
• The CFTR codes for the protein that regulates the
control of the movement of chloride ions through the
cell membrane, it has a vital importance in the
secretion of mucous and other fluid transport
throughout the body
• Since there are a 1000 different CFTR variants there
are varying levels of CF impact
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis Clinical Manifestation:
• Since CFTR codes for the protein that controls chloride
distribution in the body, CF has an effect on all exocrine
functions
• This means organs like skin sweat glands, pancreas and the
lungs are directly affected
• Normally salts in the sweat are reabsorbed by the body prior to
expulsion through the skin, in CF patients they are unable to
remove this salt effectively, thus having a salty taste
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis Clinical
Manifestation:
• This also makes CF patients very
vulnerable to dehydration in hot weather
• A sweat chloride test is used for the
diagnosis of the disease based on high
salt concentrations in the sweat of CF
patients
• Exocrine gland dysfunction will lead to
pancreatic insufficiency, dramatically
decreasing digestive enzymes and other
important digestive functions
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis Clinical Manifestation:
• Complications of lung disease are the primary cause
of death in patients with CF.
• Mucus build up and recurrent pulmonary infections
cause recurrent bronchiolitis and bronchiectasis
• This production of mucus in combination with severe
inflammation cause atelectasis, pneumonia, or lung
abscesses
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis Clinical Manifestation:
• As the disease progresses it may cause cor pulmonale,
with marked hypoxemia
• Diagnosis of CF is suspected when a patient has clinical
manifestations of the disease or has close family with CF
• Recurrent pulmonary infections early in life, in combination
with the sweat chloride test (iontophoresis)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Cystic Fibrosis
Treatment:
• Complicated because CF is a progressive
disease
• The use of pancreatic enzymes will help
prevent digestive dysfunction
• The use of antibiotic therapy, anti-
inflammatories, bronchodilators, and lung
clearance therapies like chest
physiotherapies will help prolong times
between necessary hospital treatments
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 1.1.3 Reivew
• Identify Neonatal Pediatric Disease Processes
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 2: Conventional Mechanical Ventilation &
High Frequency Mechanical Ventilation (HFOV)
▪ Determine initial conventional ventilator
settings for neonatal and pediatric patients.
▪ Determine initial HFOV settings for neonatal
and pediatric patients.
▪ Understand initial settings into a HFOV for an
infant.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 2.1.1
• Determine initial conventional ventilator settings for neonatal and
pediatric patients.
• Without reference, Determine initial conventional ventilator settings
for neonatal and pediatric patients with at least 70% accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NCPAP/CPAP
• CPAP or NCPAP for infants is much the same as an
adult patient
• The application for infants uses nasal specific masks
and nasal prongs that help provide improved FRC
(functional residual capacity) and static lung
compliance
• Spontaneous effort and rate must be met to place the
patient on a NIV
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NIV
• CPAP is indicated when arterial oxygenation is
inadequate despite higher FiO2
• Generally RDS will be recognized in these
patients
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NIV: NCPAP
• Generally starting at 4-6
cmH20 for
pediatric/neonates and
increasing by half or 1
increments to improve
oxygenation in patients
• CPAP is generally used
as a lung recruitment
modality, and to reduce
the effect of PPHN/Lung
collapse associated with
surfactant deficiency in
premature infants
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NCPAP Indications
• Respiratory Distress
• Abnormal Breathing Patterns
• Pulmonary edema
• Post-extubation failure
• Lung Disease
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NCPAP Indications
• Apnea of prematurity
• Obstructive sleep apnea
• Decreased lung volumes on chest radiograph
• Pneumonia
• Tracheomalacia
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NCPAP
• Indications: PaO2 <50 mmHg or FiO2 requirement
greater than 60% CPAP will be indicated
• Contraindications: Respiratory Arrest, PH <7.25
PCO2 >50 mmHg, since CPAP is not indicated for
PaCO2 removal.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
• CPAP in an infant can be as simple as a continuous flow device,
to as complicated as a flow triggered device in patients that
require a higher level of flow
• Generally CPAP levels are 4-6 cmH20 and increased as
necessary to resolve RDS and PaO2 issues in the patient
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
• Lung recruitment to maintain adequate
ventilation and oxygenation is incredibly
important
• Weaning from CPAP will be done when the
patient has FiO2 less that .30-.40, a reduction
in WOB and chest radiograph and clinical
assessment that the underlying disorder has
been rectified
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NCPAP example:
• If an infant is on a nasal cannula
▪ SpO2 86%
▪ FiO2 requirement of 70%
▪ After ABG:
✓ PaO2 is 48 mmHg
✓ PCO2 is 45 mmHg
• The RT would place the patient on a NCPAP
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
NCPAP Delivery Devices
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Neonatal Ventilation
• Conventional mechanical ventilation is the delivery of bulk
flow humidified gas into and out of the lungs
• The comparison between neonates/pediatrics and adults
is similar but the physiology of the patients is very
different
• Application of air to the lungs to produce a certain tidal
volume is based off the Compliance and the Resistance
of the airways
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ventilation cont…
• Compliance being how easy it is (the dispensability of the
lungs) to get air in and expand and stretch the chest wall
• Resistance is the tendency for the airways to resist the
influx of air into the lungs due to friction
• The product of Compliance and Resistance that leads to
something called the respiratory time constant
▪ This is the measure of time necessary for the
equilibration of a change in airway pressure
▪ (TC= C x R)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Long/Short Time Constants
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Neonatal Ventilation Differences
• Respiratory time constants are important for
Neonates because their lungs can be stiff
immediately after birth due to an insufficient amount
of surfactant being produced
• This means shorter time constants, and the filling and
emptying of the lungs occurs much faster
• shorter I to E ratios are required, as compared to
pediatric and adult patients (longer)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatric Ventilator Differences
• Pediatric patients with Asthma and other
impaired airflow or high resistance have longer
time constants, which more time is required to fill
and empty
• Meaning longer inspiratory and expiratory times
are needed.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Infant Ventilators
• Historically neonatal ventilators are continuous flow,
pressure limited, and time cycled ventilators
• This method of delivery has changed in previous
years due to ventilators being able to identify tiny
flow changes in the ventilator cir t with the
introduction of a pneumotachograph
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pneumotachography
• A pneumotachograph
allows detection of
patients flow changes
proximal to the airway,
allowing flow triggering
for even the smallest
infants
Old!
• Breaths are controlled
by volume or pressure
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Initial Application:
• Infant and Pediatric patients are at variable levels of lung
development in their lifetimes
• Every patient has a different set of volumes and pressures that
are going to match their particular lung development
• Initially, while using bag mask ventilation with a monometer
(Jackson Reese/Flow Inflating) we can visualize the amount of
pressure needed to properly oxygenate our patient during
resuscitation
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Initial Application:
• When you bag the patient, you can also feel a
difference in the patients compliance as you bag
• As RT’s we should recognize the specific disease
process that’s afflicting our patient, and try to
adjust tidal volumes and I:E ratios to match their
ventilator needs
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Specific Neonatal/Pediatric
Ventilator Settings
• Neonatal Guidelines for Ventilator Management are
straightforward, based upon the patient’s condition and
specific disease process
• Pediatric Guidelines for Ventilator Management can be
varied upon the specific hospital based upon the patient’s
condition and specific disease process
▪ This is because pediatric development is varied through
different age groups, and should be considered before
applying ventilator management
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ventilator Settings:
PIP (Peak Inspiratory Pressure)
• Utilize pressures required to move patient’s chest
during bag mask ventilation.
• PIP should not exceed 30 cmH20, higher levels have
shown to cause ventilator-induced lung injury
✓ *This rule CAN BE BROKEN in cases of premature
birth/chest wall rigidity due to fentanyl infusion
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ventilator Settings: PEEP
• PEEP is your baseline pressure above
zero, used to prevent alveolar collapse
and maintain lung recruitment through
the breath cycle
• If PEEP is set too low, decreased FRC,
altered V/Q mismatch and hypoxemia
can occur
• If PEEP is too high, over distention may
occur, leading to lung injury
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ventilator Settings: PEEP Continued…
• Peep is initially set between 4 cmH20 to 6 cmH20
although higher levels may be used
• PEEP is set in conjunction with PIP
• The difference between the two is called the delta P or
ventilation pressure
• Increasing or lowering the Delta P will decrease or
increase your tidal volume
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Infant Tidal Volume
• Is generally 6-8 ml/Kg for normal lung function.
• 4-5 ml/Kg for ARDS or lung injury
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ventilator Rate
• Neonates have variable respiratory rates dependent upon
their gestational age
• 40-60 BPM is normal for neonates.
▪ A normal respiratory rate is can be anywhere between 20-60 dependent
upon the age of the child.
• Rates should be based upon desired PaCO2 for children
and infants.
• Generally allowing for some hypercapnia is allowed, and
based upon the hospital you are working at
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Inspiratory Time (i-Time):
• I time is set between .2 - .4 for neonates
• I time for pediatrics can be up to 1 second
• I-time should be utilized based upon the patients
disease process
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Oxygen Concentration:
• O2 concentration should be kept as low as possible.
• The immature lung (neonates) is particularly
susceptible to O2 toxicity, as the immune system has
not yet developed well enough to defend itself against
superoxidants
• Premature infant’s oxygenation saturation should be
maintained between 88% to 95% so that retinal
damage, Retinopathy of Prematurity (ROP) doesn’t
develop
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
AARC Guidelines & Indications for Intubation
• Reasons to intubate a pediatric/infant patient
▪ Apnea
▪ Hypoxemia (PaO2 < 50 mmHg)
▪ Hypercapnia (pH <7.20-7.25)
▪ Acidosis despite CPAP with Supplemental oxygen
▪ RDS
▪ Neurological Compromise
▪ Congenital Issues
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
AARC Hazards/Contraindications for
Intubation and Mechanical Ventilation:
• Air leak syndromes secondary to barotrauma and
volumtrauma
• Chronic lung disease associated with PPV and O2 Toxicity
• Airway Complications (Tracheomalacia, Air Leak, Subglottic
Stenosis ect…)
• Increased WOB
• Pneumonias
• Decreased venous returnImproving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Air Leak Syndromes
• Air Leak Syndrome - A term used to describe
problems that happen when air collects within a
baby's chest, but outside the normal air cells of the
lungs. The air then creates pressure on the lungs and
makes breathing very difficult.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Air Leak Syndromes
• Several air leak syndromes can affect the
neonate like pneumothorax and
pneumomediastinums
• Air leak syndromes are more likely to
occur to underdeveloped lungs and other
factors of the neonate
• PIE (Pulmonary Interstitial Emphysema)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Monitoring
• O2 and CO2 monitoring
• Blood gases should be maintained
▪ PaO2 >40 mm Hg and less than 70 mm Hg to prevent
ROP
▪ PaCO2 Should be maintained at levels to maintain a
pH above 7.25
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Assessment of Outcome
• Reduction in WOB
• Radiographic evidence of improved lung volumes
• Subjective improvement in lung volumes
• Improved gas exchange
▪ Maintain a PaO2 > 50 mm Hg with FiO2 < 60%
▪ Reverse respiratory acidosis > 7.25
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 2.1.1 Review
• Determine initial conventional ventilator settings for neonatal and
pediatric patients.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 2.1.2 PC
• Input initial settings for conventional mechanical ventilator for an
infant.
• Given a scenario:
▪ Decide on the type of ventilation and initial setting
▪ Put the setting into the ventilator
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 2.2.1
• Determine Initial HFOV settings for neonatal and
pediatric patients
• Without reference, Determine Initial HFOV settings for
neonatal and pediatric patients with at least 70%
accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
HFV
• High frequency ventilation form of invasive
mechanical ventilation that uses small Vt values less
than anatomic dead space at rapid frequencies,
sometimes greater than 900 breaths/min
• Primary goal of HFV is to provide adequate ventilation
and oxygenation while limiting the incidence of lung
injury
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Indications of HFV
• Failure of mechanical ventilation (CMV) as an indication
• Preterm infants with severe lung disease requiring PIP
higher than 30 cm H2O
• Severe meconium aspiration syndrome
• Persistent pulmonary Hypertension that does not respond
to maximum ventilator support
• Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
HFV
• There are two primary types of HFV:
▪ High Frequency Oscillatory Ventilation
▪ High Frequency Jet Ventilation
• HFOV is the most common form of High Frequency Ventilation
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
3100 A vs JET
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
HFV
• Oxygenation is achieved by maintaining a high lung
resting volume (increased FRC) by establishing a high
Paw, similar to CPAP, between 16-30.
• This is essentially a recruitment maneuver, maintaining
higher level of pressure in the Alveoli, allowing better
gas exchange
• Improves V/Q ratio by opening previously collapsed
alveoli (Recruitment)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
HFV
• HFV reduces the overstretching the alveoli at high
pressures, or repetitive opening and closing
stresses on the lungs
• This should reduce the amount of damage done by
mechanical ventilation.
CPAP With a
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
wiggle! 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
Gas Transport Theory of HFV
• Spike Formation
• Helical Diffusion
• Taylor Dispersion
• Pendelluft Ventilation
• Molecular Diffusion
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Spike formation
• Spike Formation: High energy wave form penetrates the center of
the airway lumen.
• This enhances bulk flow of gas in the upper airways going deeper
into the lungs and allowing flow to the deeper tissues of the lung.
Spike
Formation
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Helical Diffusion
• Helical diffusion: The gas exiting along the
circumference of the lung tissue that is passing by
the spike formation from every breath is allowing
CO2 removal to occur.
• Fresh gas enters through the middle via spike
formation, helical diffusion ensures CO2 removal
from the lung. Helical
Diffusion
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Taylor dispersion
• Taylor dispersion: this is the augmented diffusion of
gas in situations of parabolic (shape of the gas flow)
gas flow.
• So as fresh gas enters through the center of the
airway lumen (spike theory) and CO2 exits along the
periphery of the wall (helical diffusion) it maintains a
balance of diffusion necessary to maintain ventilation
and oxygenation of the lung.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pendelluft Ventilation
• Pendelluft ventilation: result of gas mixing between lung regions that
have different time constants.
• So during fast ventilation lung units that are filling slowly (higher
resistance) have a tendency to fill slower, while healthier units fill more
quickly.
• At the end of rapid inspiration (like HFV) the fast filling units empty and
help fill the slowly filling lung units with the different time constants.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
Molecular diffusion:
• Molecular diffusion: The rapid random thermal
oscillation of a molecule.
• So long as the molecules have a constant
temperature, molecular diffusion always occurs.
• This allows for gas exchange at the level of the
A/C membrane. Related image
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Indications
• 1. Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the Newborn
• 2. Meconium Aspiration Syndrome
• 3. Air leak syndromes: pneumothorax, pulmonary interstitial
emphysema
• 4. Severe Respiratory Distress Syndrome
• 5. Pulmonary hypoplasia
• 6. Failure of conventional ventilation (plateau pressures ≥ 30-35
cmH20 with tidal volumes of 5-7 ml/kg and severe respiratory acidosis,
pH< 7.1)
• 7. Failure of oxygenation (e.g. ARDS) a. SpO2 < 90%, or b. PaO2/FiO2
< 150, despite FiO2 > 60% and optimal PEEP, or c. Oxygenation index
(OI) > 15 (where OI = [MAP x FiO2(%)] / PaO2)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
HFOV
PISTON CENTER
AMPLITUDE
Bias
Flow
MAP
ALARMS Hz (Frequency)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
HFOV
• Uses a piston of microprocessor gas controllers to push air into
and out of the lungs.
• Fresh gas is delivered through the ventilator cir t as “bias flow”
• Settings for this ventilator are patient dependent and variable
based on size, weight and disease processes
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFOV: Bias Flow
• Flow at a constant rate
• Helps sweep out excess CO2 and provides the flow
to generate MAP
▪ Increasing Bias flow – increase in MAP
• Impacts PaO2 by adjusting the MAP upwards
• Bias flow adjusts both oxygenation and carbon
dioxide elimination
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFOV: MAP
• Provides oxygenation and lung recruitment pressures
• Should be increased to see lung expansion to the Thoracic
vertebrae 8-9, maintain MAP if lungs are inflated to the T-8 – T-9
• Can be set from CV by adding +5 to the MAP required to
ventilate/oxygenate the patient currently
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFOV: Amplitude (∆P)
• Tidal volume
▪ Controls CO2 in the same manner
• The oscillatory pressure amplitude, creating
a “wiggle” on the patients belly or thighs (or
Xyphoid process)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dloNu1xDUjA
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFOV: Frequency (Hz)
• One Hz is the equivalent of 60 breath cycles (60 Breaths)
• Frequency has an inverse effect on amplitude
▪ As frequency increases, amplitude decreases
• This is due to a smaller amount of time to deliver the “tidal
volume” with the increase in cycles
▪ To eliminate more CO2, frequency should be decreased to
allow for more time to allow more pressure to reach the alveoli
and the lungs to be ventilated
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFOV
• I Time
▪ Generally set to 33%, and not adjusted.
• FiO2
▪ Set by a blender attached to the vent.
▪ Similar settings for O2 should be followed.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always 
 
What happens if someone slaps you at high
frequency?
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
HFJV
• High-frequency jets operate on the principle of a nozzle or
injector that creates high velocity “jets” of gas directed into the
lungs.
• Exhalation is passive utilizing the elastic recoil of the lungs.
• These vents are only used in Pediatric and Neonates, and are
mostly used in the treatment of BPD, PIE and other air leak
syndromes.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
High Frequency Jet Ventilation
https://youtu.be/2ZUdg-P-7hA
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFJV
• I-Time is generally set at .02 sec.
▪ This provides minimal time for the jet of air to cause large
attenuations (pressure changes) in the alveoli.
▪ Protect against lung damage or VILI.
• Rate is set between 240-660 to meet the patient’s requirements.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFJV
• PIP set to maintain a certain driving
pressure
▪ Drive pressure is the ∆P Pip-PEEP
▪ Important for the alveolar ventilation
and elimination of CO2
▪ Can be set lower than the PIP on the
vent
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFJV
• Conventional ventilation drives the oxygenation of the patient.
▪ Increasing PEEP will help improve oxygenation, higher PEEP may be
required than on normal conventional mechanical ventilation
▪ Increase CV Rate
✓ This is a lung recruitment maneuver
✓ Generally means your PEEP is too low
▪ Increase I-time
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFJV
• HFV settings are primarily used for Ventilation
▪ Your Delta P is the most important factor for increasing or
decreasing PaCO2
✓ Increase your PIP on the HFV to decrease PaCO2
✓ Decrease your PEEP
• Increasing or Decreasing your rate between 240 to 660 BPM
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFJV
• The importance of Servo Pressure
▪ Servo pressure is the driving pressure that automatically regulates
flow
▪ Servo pressure changes as lung volume or mechanics change
▪ Can act as a early warning sign or cue that your patient is getting
worse or getting better
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Settings for HFJV
• Servo Pressure Increases with:
▪ Improving compliance or resistance
▪ Leak around the ETT (Baby is growing)
▪ Tubing Leak
• Servo Pressure Decreases with:
▪ Worsening compliance and resistance
▪ Obstructed ETT
▪ Tension Pneumothorax
▪ Right mainstem intubation
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 2.2.1 Review
• Determine Initial HFOV settings for neonatal and pediatric
patients
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 2.2.2 PC
• Input initial settings into a HFOV for an infant.
• Given a scenario:
▪ Decide on the initial setting to be used
▪ Put the setting into the ventilator
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3: Neonatal/Pediatric Respiratory
Equipment
▪ 3.1.1 - Identify basic facts and terms about transcutaneous
monitoring.
▪ 3.1.2 - Identify basic facts and terms about Nitric Oxide delivery
systems.
▪ 3.1.3 - Identify basic facts and terms about Incubator operation.
▪ 3.1.4 - Employ basic respiratory therapies to neonatal and pediatric
patients. (PC)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3.1.1
• Identify Basic Facts and Terms about
Transcutaneous Monitoring.
• Without reference, Identify Basic Facts and
Terms about Transcutaneous Monitoring with
at least 70% accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Transcutaneous Monitoring (PtcCO2)
• Transcutaneous blood gas monitoring
allows for a constant monitoring of the
patients PaO2 and PCO2 without the
need of continuously drawing blood
gases
• Transcutaneous blood gas monitors are
different from normal saturation
monitors in that they ‘see’ both PaO2
AND PCO2 measured as PtcO2 and
PtcCO2
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Transcutaneous Monitoring
• Transcutaneous monitors also differ from saturation
monitors in that they heat the skin to help arterialize
the capillaries beneath the skin and increase the
permeability of the skin to O2 and CO2 allowing the
gases to more readily diffuse to the sensor
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Factors influencing transcutaneous blood
gas monitors
• Age and perfusion status (vasoconstriction/dehydration, low
cardiac output ect..) have a direct impact on the actuality of the
measured items
• Premature infants/Neonates/Children have the greatest
accuracy as far as transcutaneous blood gas monitors
▪ Due to the composition of their skin
▪ Easier to detect changes
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Indications
• For patients who are hemodynamically stable and in need of
monitoring of their PaCO2 values, but may have issues either
collecting blood or with low Hb counts
• Can be used for diagnostic purposes, such as in the assessment
of functional shunts or a patient’s response to an oxygen
challenge to determine congenital heart diseases
• https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4I4Cj0TmMxc
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Contraindications and Precautions
• Thermal damage to the skin due to the heating of the skin.
▪ Electrode will need to be repositioned every 2-6 hours to prevent thermal injury
▪ Stabilization of values can take up to 20 minutes after moving the electrode
• False negatives leading to false treatment
• Values need to be trended against blood gas values in some cases to assure accuracy of
readings
• Values can vary greater than 10% in some areas even with proper probe placement
▪ Not a 100% assured way of determining a patients PaCO2 and PaO2
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3.1.1 Review
▪ Identify Basic Facts and Terms about
Transcutaneous Monitoring.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3.1.2
• Identify basic facts and terms about Nitric Oxide delivery
systems.
• Without reference, Identify basic facts and terms about Nitric
Oxide delivery systems with at least 70% accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
iNO (inhaled Nitrogen Oxide)
• NO (Nitric Oxide) is a selective pulmonary
vasodilator used to treat newborns who require
mechanical ventilation primarily for hypoxic
respiratory failure
• Works by improving shunts created by our bodies
natural ability to constrict pulmonary vasculature
local to the alveoli that are not being well ventilated
or oxygenated.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
iNO Systems
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
261
 
iNO
• By vasodilating constricted capillaries
surrounding healthy alveoli, we can overcome
the shunting occurring in the lungs.
• iNO improves oxygenation and reduces the
need for extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation
• Normal Starting dose is 20 PPM
• Therapeutic Range 2 – 20 ppm
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Indications for iNO
• Hypoxic Respiratory Failures
• Term and near-term neonates (>34 weeks’ gestation) with PPHN
• Gradient between preductal and postductal SpO2
• Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia
• Oxygenation index (OI) > 25
▪ OI = (Paw x FiO2/PaO2)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
iNO: Weaning and Other Considerations
• NO will combine with Oxygen to form the much more toxic
Nitrogen Dioxide which is incredibly potent and should be
maintained below a level of 2 PPM.
• iNO can also cause formation of toxic molecules like
peroxynitrite which can damage other biological tissue cells
in the body
• Weaned by 50% down to 1 PPM then can be taken off. FiO2
should be increased as iNO is weaned to prevent rebound
hypoxemia. Rebound hypoxemia and a return to PPHN.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
iNO: Weaning and Other Considerations
• Methemoglobin should be monitored. Methemoglobin is created
by NO combining with oxyhemoglobin producing a ferrous form of
hemoglobin that can no longer take up or release O2
• This makes it an ineffective form of Hemoglobin, and should be
monitored closely and maintained less than 5% of the tHb
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
ECMO
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation:
• Modified form of cardiopulmonary bypass
used to provide relatively long-term
pulmonary or cardiopulmonary life support
when maximum medical intervention has
failed
• There are two separate kinds of ECMO:
▪ VA – Veno-Arterial
▪ VV – Veno-venous
▪ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9I
zwK0ZIcTo
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
VA ECMO
• VA – Veno-arterial both heart and lung function is
supported
• A cannula is inserted into the right internal jugular
vein and advanced to the right atrium. A cannula
is also inserted in the right common carotid
artery, returning oxygenated blood to the aortic
arch.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Veno-arterial ECMO
• Blood is drained from the right heart to a cicurit where it is pumped through an
artificial lung called a Quadrox
▪ The blood is oxygenated, and CO2 can either be removed or
replaced depending on the necessity of the patient
▪ Blood is then warmed and returned to the body
• Depending upon the flow of the pump leading back to the patient, a higher
revolutions per minute (RPM) can produce a higher blood pressure
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Venovenous ECMO
• VV – venovenous in which only the lungs are supported
• For VV a cannula is inserted into the right internal jugular vein
and the right femoral vein
▪ The blood is still taken through a quadrox and returns to the patient
much the same way as VA, however there isn’t as much cardiac
support through VV as there is VA.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
ECMO Setup
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3.1.2 Review
▪ Identify basic facts and terms about Nitric Oxide delivery systems.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3.1.3
• Identify basic facts and terms about incubator operation
• Without reference, Identify basic facts and terms about incubator
operation with at least 70% accuracy.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Incubator: Radiant Warmer/Isolette
• Dependent upon the hospital that you work
at, but most NICU’s are equipped with
radiant warmers and isolettes (trademarked
by Draeger company, these are also known
as incubators.)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Incubator: Radiant Warmer/Isolette
• The beds are usually capable of delivering oxygen,
suction and heat
• Incubator beds are utilized to provide a quiet and
isolated environment for the newborn to continue to
“feed and grow”
▪ Great for maintaining exact temperatures
▪ Can be difficult to manipulate the patients in times
of emergencies or larger interventions
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Radiant Warmer
• Radiant warmers are utilized more as an
initial or late stage method of transporting
newborn infants.
▪ Usually radiant warmers have the ability to
attach oxygen canisters to the back of the
unit
▪ Radiant warmers are excellent for an open
environment to manipulate the patient and
perform CPR
▪ Usually the standard unit inside the delivery
rooms
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
RCPs Role
• Primarily Rt’s help stock and maintain supplies in the drawers
beneath the beds
▪ Suction
▪ Blades
▪ Nasal Cannulas
▪ Ambu bag with Mask
▪ Heat Probe
▪ Saturation Probe
▪ Towels
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Therapy Devices
• O2 Therapy devices specific to the neonatal and pediatric
populations
• Most medications and medication delivery modalities are similar
to those learned about in Pharmacology and Equipment units
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Jackson Reese Bag (Anesthesia Bag)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Endotracheal intubation
• Estimating formula for tube ID
▪ Tube ID = (Age + 16)/4
▪ Tube ID = Height (cm)/20
• Estimating Tube Length
▪ 12 + (Age/2)
▪ Nasal: 15 + (Age/2)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Nasal Cannula
• Can be used for premature
infants the whole way
through adults.
• Flows from as low as .25
mL a minute to 6 L/min
• Inaccurate FiO2/Excessive
flows/Blender to maintain
adequate O2
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Oxyhood:
• 21% - 100% Premature
infants less than 6 months,
Warmed air will be given at
higher flows (7L/min and
above) to provide adequate
oxygenation and ventilation
• Oxyhoods are good at
eliminating small
pneumothoraxes and
identifying right to left
shunting in patients with
congenital heart issuesImproving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Incubator:
• Incubators can provide <40%
O2, generally we combine a
nasal cannula or NCPAP to
provide oxygenation in these
scenarios
• Incubators are great for providing
excellent heat
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Blender Systems:
• O2 and Air enter the blender and pass through a dual
pressure regulator
• Gas flows to a precision proportioning valve
▪ The two gas pressure are equal at this point
▪ The varying size of the inlets provides precise
control over the relative concentration
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
• When a gas source fails a harmonic sound is
audible
• FiO2 should be confirmed with an O2 analyzer
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatrics: Simple Mask:
• The body of the mask gathers and stores O2
between patient breaths
• Greater than 10L/min = satisfactory
oxygenation
• Less than 5 L/min = carbon dioxide (CO2)
rebreathing
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatrics: Simple Mask:
• FiO2 varies depends on:
▪ The O2 input flow
▪ The mask volume
▪ The extent of air leakage
▪ The patient’s breathing pattern
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Pediatrics: Air Entrainment Mask
• Precise FiO2, Good for
Transports, easily applied.
• Drawbacks are pressure necrosis,
low humidity, and difficulty in
maintaining it to a patients
(especially a childs) face.
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
– NCPAP (Nasal Continuous Positive
Airway Pressure):
– High Flow Nasal Cannulas
– SiPAP/CPAP/BiPAP Devices
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
High flow nasal
cannulas
• Well suited for application in
neonates and in children
• Studies have shown that the use of
HFNC will generate a certain amount
of CPAP in children, increasing lung
recruitment and
oxygenation/ventilation effectiveness
• The device is used to deliver
maximum humidification with
minimal rain out in the cir t
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Device Age FDO2 Advantages Disadvantages
Air
entrainment
mask
≥3 yr High flow; 0.24-1
Precise FiO2;
good for
transport; ease
of application
Low relative humidity; pressure
necrosis to face; difficult to fit
and maintain on active child,
not recommended for infants;
risk of aspiration
Nasal
cannula
Premature infants
to adult
Low flow;
25 ml/min–
6.0 L/min
Tolerated well
by all ages
Inaccurate FiO2; low relative
humidity; excessive flows may
cause inadvertent CPAP in
infants; precise FiO2 may be
achieved with O2 blender
Incubator Newborns ≤28
days
<0.40 FiO2,
combine use with
cannula or hood for
precise FiO2
Low FiO2 for
stable infants;
neutral thermal
environment for
premature
infants
Varying FiO2; long stabilization
time; limits access to child for
patient care
Oxyhood
Overheating may cause apnea
Warmed and
and dehydration; underheating
0.21-1 FiO2 with O2
humidified gas
may cause O2 consumption;
Premature infants
blender maintained
at stable FiO2
inadequate flow causes CO2
to ≤6 mo
at 30° C to 34° C
during routine
buildup; noise produced by
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
patient care
humidification device may
 
cause hearing loss
 
SiPAP/CPAP/BIPAP Devices:
• Broad spectrum of CPAP devices including bubble cpap, sipap,
v60 which provide an exact pressure measurement to a patient
• Generally starting at 4-6 cmH20 for pediatric/neonates and
increasing by half or 1 increments to improve oxygenation in
patients
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
SiPAP/CPAP/BIPAP Devices:
• CPAP is generally used as a lung recruitment modality, and to
reduce the effect of PPHN/Lung collapse associated with
surfactant deficiency in premature infants. Indications: PaO2
<50 or FiO2 requirement greater than 60%
• Contraindications: Respiratory Arrest, PH <7.25 PCO2 >50 mmHg
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3.1.3 Review
▪ Identify basic facts and terms about incubator operation
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Unit 3.1.4 (PC)
• Employ basic respiratory therapies to neonatal and pediatric
patients
• Given a scenario:
▪ Determine action plain
▪ Demonstrate procedures that should be conducted
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Oxygen Devices for Neonate/Infants
• Typically you will see a lot of use for HFNC
(Vapotherms/Fisher Paykel)
• If this doesn’t work, the next step in cases of poor
oxygenation/CO2 exchange will be the CPAP/BiPAP
Machine (Usually a SiPAP machine)
• Lastly will be intubation (in this case we will use the
Draeger as it’s a common ventilator in hospitals
everywhere)
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bag Mask and Bronchodialator
• Infants/neonates have very small Vt’s, normally we
assist in the delivery of bronchodilators and
corticosteroids by bagging in the medication with the
use of a spacer and Jackson Reese bag
• For older pediatric patients, you will see the typical
facemask/SVN that are in adults
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Aerogen
• Aerogens are ultrasonic nebulizers that can deliver
very tiny nebulized droplets (about .3 to .5 microns)
• Very useful for pediatrics and neonates that are on
ventilators, can be placed inline
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Jackson Reese/Anesthesia Bag Review
• Flow inflating bag
• Flow Control Valve to regulate pressure
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Bag Manometer to Ventilator
• Whatever is used to get proper chest
rise/SaO2 can be used as initial
settings on a ventilator until and ABG
can be obtained
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Blade Sizes/ETT
• Also a size 00 for the very small pre-term
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Taping/Neobar
• Taping can be in an “X” or “Y” pattern to secure the tube in place
• Neobar/Neotech equipment is also usually available
▪ Tape is useful since infants/children are varying sizes
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Ventilator Modes Commonly Used
• PC-SIMV with VG
• PC-VC
• We do not go over PRVC or VG, you will get
these in Phase II
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 
 
Alarm Check
• Check your alarms and make sure you “bracket” them
appropriately
Improving Health and Building Readiness. Anytime, Anywhere — Always
 